[DIP-201] 2-chain DiemBFT (#202)
diem/dip: dips/dip-201.md

---
dip: 201
title: 2-chain DiemBFT
authors: Zekun Li (@zekun000)

> dip manager: Avery Ching (aching)

Reviewer: Sorry, also please remove this.  We track DIP managers via the GH issue now.

status: Draft
type: Standard
created: 08/09/2020
---

# Summary

This DIP describes a major latency improvement - 2-chain commit rule instead of 3-chain - brought by DiemBFT v4.

# Abstract

Currently, DiemBFT inherits the 3-chain commit rules from hotstuff for optimistic responsiveness. However, with timeout

> and round synchronization mechanism from DiemBFT, our research shows that we could get 2-chain commit rule almost for free.

Author: just to confirm, the minor increase refers to the quorum cert included in the timeout?

> We only discuss engineering impact and omit the theoretic part from this DIP, readers are encouraged to read the full white paper.

Author: the whitepaper is going to be released soon, will update once it's out

    pub epoch: u64,
    pub round: Round,
    pub hqc_round: Round,
}
```

## Rules
Safety Rules has been changed accordingly, proof of safety and liveness is in white paper.

Voting Rule:
1. block.round > last vote round
2. block.round == block.qc.round + 1 || (block.round == tc.round + 1 && block.qc.round >= tc.highest_hqc_round)

Timeout Rule:
1. round >= last vote round
2. (round == qc.round + 1 || round == tc.round + 1) && qc.round >= 1-chain round

Commit Rule:
 - It's safe to commit block A if there exist a 2-chain A <- QC <- B <- QC  such that b.round == a.round + 1.

## Upgrade
Switching from existing DiemBFT to the newer version requires reconfiguration. On-chain consensus config is added to support the transition.
We also switch from BCS to a backward compatible wire protocol (JSON) to ease the complexity in migrating data structures.

## Testing
Consensus protocol change should be taken seriously since it's critical to the safety and liveness of the blockchain. Current plan includes
1. Validate protocol and proof 
2. Enable in all testing environment
3. Add fault injection
4. Stress test the reconfiguration switch
5. Go through regular release pipeline

## Client

> This change is client agnostic besides the latency improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change is client agnostic, other than an observable improvement in commit latency improvement.
```

There is a slight nuance here that the LedgerInfo fields will reflect this change right?  For instance the rounds and such from BlockInfo will follow the 2-chain, but no one (e.g. clients) are supposed to be deriving consensus internals from such field.  Still might be useful to make sure that is clear here.

Author: agreed
